1^Pilot^Malcolm lives with his dysfunctional family: neurotic father Hal, control freak mother Lois, dim-witted bully elder brother Reese, and odd younger brother Dewey. His eldest brother, Francis, has been packed off to military school for chronic misbehavior. At school, Malcolm tries to keep his head down and avoid the school bully Spath, but his teachers spot his intelligence and testing reveals his I.Q. to be 165. When Lois forces him to join the school's gifted class, Malcolm objects because he doesn't want to be bullied for being a "Krelboyne". Frustrated at being ostracized by the regular kids, Malcolm lashes out at Spath, and with some help from his new friend Stevie (Craig Lamar Traylor), fortuitously humiliates Spath and becomes the nerds' hero.
2^Red Dress^Lois is supposed to meet Hal at an expensive restaurant for their anniversary date, but Lois forgets to go after she finds her red dress burned and flushed down the toilet, sending her into a violent rage. She spends the night punishing Reese, Dewey, and Malcolm, trying to figure out which of them burned her dress. Meanwhile, Hal makes friends with a member of the restaurant staff while waiting for Lois. Malcolm, seeing that he and his brothers cannot fight Lois alone, calls Francis for help against Lois. It is later revealed that Hal burned the dress by accident.
3^Home Alone 4^While Hal and Lois are away for the weekend, Francis comes home from military school to babysit. Malcolm overhears Lois and Hal's discussion about Francis and believes he will be allowed to return home permanently if he does a good job, so he convinces the other boys to be on their best behavior. A series of mishaps nevertheless occur, but the boys manage to fix or hide them. Seeing the good work Francis has done, Hal and Lois send him back for military school because they realize how much he is "improving" there.
4^Shame^Fed up with his constant abuse, Malcolm beats up a huge bully named Kevin who won't leave him alone, but it turns out that Kevin is only a 7-year-old. Malcolm feels guilty and tries to clear his conscience by signing up for a charity run, but fails when he trips on his untied shoe at the beginning of the run. Hal is confronted by a man who appears to be Kevin's father and beats him up, but it turns out that it was Kevin's 15-year old brother. Dewey is injured climbing a tree, so Hal cuts it down, angering the neighbors because they can see the family's house. Hal grows to miss the tree, so he plants another one. Francis decides to steal the slides for the military academy's disgusting sex education slideshow, but he finds some embarrassing slides of Commandant Spangler (Daniel Von Bargen) in his office, which he replaces with the original slides. However, Spangler shows a cunning and trickier side by showing the cadets embarrassing slides of Francis.
5^Malcolm Babysits^The whole family is forced to live in a trailer owned by Lois' coworker, Craig, while their house is being fumigated. However, Malcolm ends up spending more time at the home of an upper-middle-class family who has hired him as their babysitter, but he learns that they were secretly videotaping him. He later blackmails the family to leave him alone and quits the job. Francis finds the corpse of a missing janitor in the basement of the military school, and teams up with his friends to give the forgotten custodian a Norse funeral, which turns into a disaster.
6^Sleepover^Malcolm stays overnight at Stevie's house. He convinces Stevie to sneak out to an arcade downtown, but Stevie's wheelchair is stolen, and they have to find his wheelchair while dragging Stevie in a cart. Meanwhile, to prove that he is mature, Lois challenges Reese to give Dewey a bath and put him to sleep in exchange for being allowed to stay up late to watch a scary movie, but the task proves more difficult than he expected. Francis is hazed by a group of upperclassmen, dubbed the "Brothers of the Apocalypse", but tells them their tricks are amateurish to what Lois did to him, and the students decide to worship Lois.
7^Francis Escapes^Francis deserts from military school to reunite with his girlfriend Bebe, but she breaks up with him as soon as he gets home. Lois finds out Francis has left school, but does not know where he went. Malcolm discovers Francis hiding in the woods near their house and brings him food, though keeping the secret from his brothers and parents grows increasingly complicated. After Hal finds Francis, he decides to drive him across the country back to military school so Lois won't find him, sympathetic to his son's romantic travails.
8^Krelboyne Picnic^The family spend the day at 'Cirque de Krelboyne', a picnic where Malcolm's classmates demonstrate their abilities. Hal violates the picnic's vegetarian policy by bringing a meat-filled cooler on the picnic, and Lois takes care of a PTA control freak who strictly oversees the food and drinks there. Reese looks forward to giving the Krelboynes a hard time but is soon on the receiving end when one of them gets his older brother involved. Despite Malcolm's attempts to escape, he is eventually forced to take the stage, where he stuns the audience with his mathematical prowess. The family soon reassure him that nothing has changed.
9^Lois vs. Evil^Lois finds out that Dewey stole a $150 bottle of cognac from the store where she works. She makes him return it, but she is fired by a tyrannic assistant manager named Mr. Pinter after he catches them. In anger she accuses Pinter for firing her out of spite for originally being up for a promotion for assistant manager. This leaves the family struggling financially, but Lois gets her job back from Pinter when she confronts him for his wrongdoings such as hiding marijuana in his desk. Craig and the others overhear this and plan to tell the district manager all about it. In humiliation, Pinter quits his job right away. Francis, chosen to be part of the color guard at a beauty pageant, gains special backstage dressing room access when some of the contestants think he's gay.
10^Stock Car Races^Hal sneaks the boys out of the class and takes them on a stock car race, and the boys try to sneak on the pit lanes, causing mayhem with the security guards. Lois' hunt for her lost paycheck unearths incriminating items that Hal and the boys stashed around the house, at the same time befriending Malcolm's teacher. Meanwhile, fed up with Spangler and his noisy dog that the students hate, Francis sneaks a huge snake into the academy and stashes it in his locker. He forgets to lock it, and the snake eats the dog before escaping. When Spangler finds out, he punishes all the cadets, but they do not care because Francis got rid of the dog.
11^Funeral^The family reluctantly prepares for Aunt Helen's funeral, but Lois gives up and announces she's going to take a bubble bath while everyone else does their own things. Hal decides to listen to his old record player, while Dewey invites a friend, and after they leave a huge spill, they start to clean it, causing a mess in the kitchen. Malcolm tries to attend a concert with a girl named Julie (Landry Allbright), but she catches him in his underwear while changing and runs away. Malcolm takes Francis' advice to use a scapegoat, and tells his parents that Reese broke Dewey's birthday present and the reason he seemed so enthusiastic to go to the funeral was that he had planned to stash the remains in the coffin. Lois promptly decides that they will attend the funeral after all so he can apologize to Aunt Helen.
12^Cheerleader^Reese joins the cheerleading squad because he has a crush on one of the cheerleaders. Malcolm is embarrassed to have a brother who is a cheerleader, and even the Krelboynes are making fun of him, but he ends up helping Reese learn his routines anyway. Dewey desperately tries to talk Lois into buying a new toy. Hal, hearing Reese crying and seeing him practicing cheerleading routines with Malcolm in the backyard, tries to give all the boys "The Talk". After his latest stunt, Spangler attempts to reach out to Francis by telling him a story of his youth, only for Francis to uncover more about Spangler himself.
13^Rollerskates^Malcolm becomes frustrated with Hal's roller skating lessons and says "the F word" to his dad; Hal punishes him severely. Lois throws out her back by screaming too loud at Reese for tracking mud in the house and refuses to take painkillers until Reese sneaks them in her milk. At Marlin Academy, Francis fakes the same back injury to get out of a wilderness survival exercise at the academy, but is caught and forced to go on the exercise.
14^The Bots and the Bees^Lois visits Francis at military school after he has a medical emergency. Francis is upset when everyone else at the academy gets along well with Lois. Hal, no longer under Lois' supervision, quickly regresses into his wild teenage persona. He resumes smoking, stops going to work, and lets Reese and Dewey get away with everything. Malcolm and the Krelboynes decide to enter a killer robot competition, but Hal takes over the project and builds a dangerous robot complete with a bee cannon, to the point that the boys end up launching the bees onto him to stop him.
15^Smunday^Lois, down with a severe case of the flu, does not realize she has spent two days in bed. Thinking Monday is Sunday, she doesn't make the boys go to school — or lift their latest grounding about giving away Dewey's bike. The boys are initially happy to get the day off school, but soon realize their mistake, as the TV is shut off as part of the punishment and they cannot leave the house lest they be seen and reported. Francis calls the boys about hiding an incriminating letter about his latest transgression at the academy, but Lois ends up finding it anyway. Lois is so caught up with both her flu and Francis' misdemeanour that she ignores punishing the boys for skipping school. With Lois ready to send Francis to a work farm, the boys try to come up with a prank that will make Lois turn her attention back to them. Meanwhile, Hal visits a Porsche dealership and ends up ruining a car because he caught Lois' flu. The salesman drives Hal home in the car, where it is further damaged by the boys' prank.
16^Water Park (Part 1)^The family takes a trip to a water park. Lois and Hal sneak alcohol into the park, try to avoid the boys and have fun. Malcolm and Reese engage in an escalating war of pranks. After they spill Lois and Hal's food and drink she catches up with them at the top of a giant water slide and berates them. Malcolm pushes her in, but she grabs both of them and pulls them down together, still yelling at them. Dewey was unable to go because of an ear infection and is left with a strict elderly babysitter (Bea Arthur), who later collapses and is taken away in an ambulance. Dewey chases a red balloon blowing around in the street. Spangler learns that Francis has been letting him win at pool to keep him in a good mood. Spangler threatens to punish Francis if he loses again, while the other cadets threaten to beat him up if he wins. When Francis misses an easy shot, Spangler starts trying to throw the match, resulting in both players trying their best to lose.
